+++
author = "Joshua Wallace"
categories = ["data science"]
tags = ["data science"]
date = "2018-06-01"
description = "Thoughts on a meeting hosted by my friend talking about her transition out of academia."
linktitle= ""
title = "Meeting with Friend About non-Academic Careers"
type = "post"

+++

Yesterday a graduate alumna of my department, [Ai-Lei Sun](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ai-lei-sun-70306775/), hosted a meeting with graduate students and postdocs in my department, talking about her transition from a postdoc to a non-academic job.  She was visiting campus for reunion weekend and was kind enough to offer to do this. As background for her, she graduated with her Ph.D. two years ago and has been pursuing postdoc work since then.  She was sought out by the company [Orbital Insight](https://orbitalinsight.com/) with whom she had had some contact in years past and decided to make the transition out of academia and work for them.

# Orbital Insight

Just a brief word on the company itself, since I want to focus more on what was discussed at the meeting than the company.  I think the company is really cool though so I still wanted to say a bit.

Orbital Insight does exactly what the company name suggests, gathers insights from orbit (more precisely, from images taken from orbit, as well as other images).  It purchases images taken from satellites, balloons, UAV's, etc. and then uses computer vision and machine learning to turn pixels into useful data and then sells information from the data to its clients. As an example, they can count the number of cars in parking lots and use that to measure how well retailers are doing.  I think this is a really interesting and fascinating way to mine data, partially because it's exactly what I do in my research as an astronomer: extract useful data from a series of images.

# What We Talked About

The meeting was very well attended: 7 grad students and 7 postdocs, which represents about a quarter of each of those segments of the department.  A lot of substantive and even spirited conversation ensued.

Ai-Lei talked a lot about nonacademic career prep and job search.  She said that an internship is probably the best way for a grad student to make the switch to a non-academic job, because then you can show that your skills have already been successfully applied outside of academia. However, an internship is not a possibility for all industry-bound grad students.  Luckily, there are other ways to demonstrate the applicability and usefulness of your skills outside of academia.  Ai-Lei suggested that a well-maintained GitHub might be the best way to do this, especially if you write code "for fun" that works on public, nonacademic datasets. That certainly is an advantage of the internet in this day: being able to have your work accessible for all to see.  It is an incredible tool and should be leveraged by all whether in or out of academia.

One interesting thing that was brought up (primarily by the postdocs in attendance) was that the time is limited for academics with Ph.D.'s not directly related to data science to be able to find data science jobs.  The thought is that many data science, AI, machine learning, etc. programs are springing up around the country, and so in a few years there will be a sufficiently large number of people formally trained in data science that there won't be room any more for people not formally trained as data scientists.  I was very surprised to hear this and I personally think that this thought not correct.  There certainly are and always will be jobs for which a "formal" data scientist---one who has been formally and deeply trained in data science, statistics, machine learning, etc. as a student---are the only ones qualified. However, many data science jobs don't need as deep of an understanding of data science theory or algorithm development as a "formal" data scientist would possess, and so someone less formally trained as a data scientist but also possessing other useful skills should be able to find a job for which their unique skillset is well suited, even with a flood of "formal" data scientists coming into the job market.  As a personal example: I work a lot with images from telescopes.  I know what kind of things can go wrong when using a telescope and the impact those things have on the images.  For any sort of data that is derived from images (especially images that consist of just a few point sources, such as images tracking satellites), I already know what to look for and I'm ready to hit the ground running.  It would probably be easier for me to learn the data science tools I need to know to use the data effectively than it will be for a "formal" data scientist to learn about how focus changes, clouds, cosmic rays, saturation, etc. affect the data.

Another point is that the term "data science" is not precisely defined and can vary greatly between industries, employers, and individuals.  What is data science?  All it takes is one Google search to find a great variety of definition.  Is it a collection of skills? A way of thinking?  Is it focused more on data wrangling, data mining, or data analysis? Is it the intersection of algorithm development and big data, or the intersection of scientific thinking and advanced computing? Is it all of these?  I've noticed that posted data science jobs vary greatly in job description to the point that some pairs of jobs, though having the same job title, are completely distinct in what they expect the successful applicant to do. Thus, though someone may be formally trained as a "data scientist", this may be very different from the training that someone else formally trained as a "data scientist" at a different institution, and these two may still be largely unqualified for a particular "data scientist" job posting.  Because of the great diversity of data science jobs out there, I believe there will always be data science jobs well suited for someone from a particular background even if they are not formally trained in data science.

# Interest from postdocs

As a last point, I was surprised at the number of postdocs who were interested in this meeting.  It was originally envisioned as just a grad student event, but Ai-Lei discovered that several postdocs were also interested.  So, about 24 hours before the event, the invitation was opened to postdocs as well.  Even with the short notice, half the audience were postdocs. There are maybe 25% more postdocs than grad students in my department, so this was a good showing.  What surprised me most, though, was which postdocs attended.  There were several whom I thought were firmly set on the academic path: well-established independent scientists making grand contributions to the field, some of whom even have prized fellowship positions.  I guess I figured anyone who had made it that far on the academic track were very happy and satisfied with astrophysics and didn't have any interest in leaving.  That is clearly not the case though.
