+++
author = "Joshua Wallace"
categories = ["data science"]
tags = ["data science"]
date = "2018-05-26"
description = "Talking about my day at DataCamp"
linktitle = ""
title = "Job Shadowing at DataCamp"
type = "post"

+++

The astrophysics academic job application cycle starts soon and my preparations, should I apply for academic jobs, need to start *now*. Because of this, I've been considering one last time whether I am interested in pursuing an academic job before I close that door forever. And just in time for this time of reflection, I had the opportunity to job shadow at a data science company.  This was through Princeton's new ["Take a Ph.D. to Work" Program](https://careerservices.princeton.edu/graduate-students/programs-workshops/take-phd-work). I shadowed David Robinson, Chief Data Science at [DataCamp](https://www.datacamp.com/home).  David is a recent Ph.D. graduate from Princeton who [actively maintains a data science blog](http://varianceexplained.org).  He got his first job post-Ph.D. as a data scientist at Stack Overflow through an invitation to interview after posting the top answer to this [SE Cross Validated question](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/47771/what-is-the-intuition-behind-beta-distribution).  I'm very grateful that he took time out of his work schedule to let me shadow him for a day and answer my questions.

## DataCamp

DataCamp is a startup that works with outside instructors to produce hands-on courses about data science.  DataCamp then hosts these courses on their platform and the instructors get a share of the revenue from the course. This business model isn't unique: Udemy, Khan Academy, Skillshare, and even YouTube are all places where instructors can create classes and generate revenue.  What is unique (I'm told) about DataCamp is how hands-on the courses are.  Integrated in the courses are coding evaluations, where a problem is given and students code up a solution, which is then automatically evaluated on the spot.  Such real-time hands-on learning increases retention, and is DataCamp's unique offer of value.

David, as Chief Data Scientist, evaluates data generated by the company and its users to improve the product.  I imagine this is similar to comparable positions at other companies.  One thing, though, that's different at DataCamp and that I liked is that the data scientists are imbedded in the various departments of the company, rather than forming a separate department.  For example, growth/sales team includes a data scientist, the product development team includes  a data scientist, etc.  This seems like a very efficient and productive way to distribute data science skills across a company.

## The Job Shadowing Experience

The job shadowing had three main components: meeting one-on-one with employees, accompanying David to a work meeting, and doing some actual data science.

The one-on-one meetings were my chance to ask questions of employees and get a better idea of what their job is like and how to better qualify myself to fill a similar job. Even though DataCamp is a startup, it's quite well established so the employees are able to work normal schedules.  The employees also are all very excited about the service they offer and so job satisfaction is very high.  A product/service I personally am proud to be contributing to is definitely something I hope for in a future job.  Asking questions of the employees, a big one I had was how to help potential employers know what skills I had, since "Astrophysics Ph.D." doesn't necessarily scream "data science skills."  I got a lot of good advice, including starting a blog where I present my skills and also having a good [GitHub account](https://github.com/joshuawallace) to showcase my work.

As great and useful as the interviews were, what was most useful for me was doing actual data science with David.  Given the proprietary nature of the data I don't want to go into details, but basically I was tasked with finding sudden changes in some time-series data.  I was given a couple of hours and developed a basic algorithm that was able to find sudden changes in some situations.  I presented my work to David, and we discussed the implications of my results and also discussed and discovered why my algorithm didn't always work.  After identifying the algorithm's shortcomings, we discussed ways to enhance it.  It was a lot of fun to be given my favorite kind of data (time-series) and reason my way through the math and logic to come up with something that produced some basic but still usable results.  This is something I wouldn't mind doing for a job.

One thing that stood out to me from the interviews and hands-on data science experience is the differing levels of analysis needed to be successful in academic vs. non-academic science.  In academic science, we are usually working on the edge of what is possible to try to see what no one else has seen before.  This requires the latest and greatest techniques and data sets and often requires months or years of work.  Sometimes you are lucky enough to generate a unique enough data set that new discoveries can come from simple analyses of the data, but that is not the rule.  On the other hand, in work as a data science (at least in a start-up like this where very basic questions remain to be answered), simple analysis techniques are often sufficient to discover the desired answer. This simplicity and accelerated rate of discovery is very appealing to me.

## Conclusion

This job shadowing experience was extremely valuable to me and helped me firmly make the decision to close the door on a future academic career and turn towards non-academic careers.  I thank David and the other employees at DataCamp who took time out of their day to talk to me.  This experience has given me several tools that will be very useful as I move forward with looking for a job in the next year.  I highly recommend anyone considering switching careers to find a job shadowing opportunity.
